Con 1
Private prisons exploit employees and prisoners for corporate gain.
Private prisons paid staff $0.38 less per hour than public prisons, $14,901 less in yearly salaries, and required 58 fewer hours of training prior to service than public prisons, leaving staff less prepared to do their jobs, contributing to a 43% turnover rate compared to 15% for public prisons. Several private prisons have been fined for understaffing, and leaving too few guards and staff to maintain order in the facilities. [22] [23]

Ivette Feliciano, PBS NewsHour Weekend producer and reporter, explained that a report from Michael Horowitz, JD, Justice Department Inspector General, found that “per capita, privately-run facilities had more contraband smuggled in, more lockdowns and uses of force by correctional officers, more assaults, both by inmates on other inmates and by inmates of correctional officers, more complaints about medical care, staff, food, and conditions of confinement, and two facilities were housing inmates in solitary confinement to free up bed space. The findings also highlighted chronic understaffing as the root of many problems.” [24]

The use of private prisons resulted in 178 more prisoners per population of one million. Each prisoner costs about $60 per day, resulting in $1.9 to $10.6 million in gains for private prisons for new prisoners. And, when private prisons are used, sentences are longer. [25] [26]

In prison, private companies can charge inflated prices for basic necessities such as soap and underwear. Communications, including phone calls and emails, also come at a steep price, forcing inmates to work for pennies ($1.09 to $2.75 per day at private prisons, or $0.99 to $3.13 in public prisons), or to rely on family to pay hundreds of dollars a month. [22] [27]

Con 2
Privatizing prisons is costly and leaves the most expensive prisoners to public prisons.
A 2019 study of prisons in Georgia found state prisons cost approximately $44.56 per inmate per day. Private prisons cost about $49.07 per inmate per day. [28]

A 2014 study found the cost to incarcerate a prisoner for one year in a private prison was about $45,000, while the cost in a public prison was $50,000. The $5,000 savings is deceptive, however, because inmates in private prisons serve longer sentences, negating at least half of the savings, and recidivism rates are largely the same as in public prisons, further negating any savings. [29]

In Arizona, a 2011 audit found medium-security state inmates cost 8.7% less per day (between $1,679 and $2,834 per inmate) than those at private prisons. Even a 1999 meta-study of prisons concluded, “private prisons were no more cost-effective than public prisons.” [30] [31]

The lack of per-prisoner savings is striking considering most private prisons only house minimum- and medium-security prisoners, who are less expensive to incarcerate than death row inmates, maximum-security inmates, or those with serious medical conditions whom the state has to house. [32]

Private prisons also often charge governments for empty prison beds, resulting in excess costs for the governments. [24]


Con 3
All prisons—not just privately operated ones--should be abolished.
Author Rachel Kushner explained, “Ninety-two percent of people locked inside American prisons are held in publicly run, publicly funded facilities, and 99 percent of those in jail are in public jails. Every private prison could close tomorrow, and not a single person would go home. But the ideas that private prisons are the culprit, and that profit is the motive behind all prisons, have a firm grip on the popular imagination.” [33]

Following that logic, Holly Genovese, PhD student in American Studies at the University of Texas at Austin, argued, “Anyone who examines privately owned US prisons has to come to the conclusion that they are abhorrent and must be eliminated. But they can also be low-hanging fruit used by opportunistic Democrats to ignore the much larger problem of — and solutions to — mass incarceration… Private prisons should be abolished. But if the problem is the profit — institutions unjustly benefiting from the labor of incarcerated people — the fight against private prisons is only a beginning. Political figures and others serious about fighting injustice must engage with the profit motives of federally and state-funded prisons as well, and seriously consider the abolition of all prisons — as they are all for profit.” [34]

As Woods Ervin, a prison abolitionist with Critical Resistance, explained, “we have to think about the rate at which the prison-industrial complex is able to actually address rape and murder. We’ve spent astronomical amounts of our budgets at the municipal level, at the federal level, on policing and caging people. And yet I don’t think that people feel any safer from the threat of sexual assault or the threat of murder. What is the prison-industrial complex doing to actually solve those problems in our society?” Abolitionists instead focus on community-level issues to prevent the concerns that lead to incarceration in the first place. Eliminating private prisons still leaves the problems of mass incarceration and public prisons. [35]