Pro 1
Privatizing prisons can reduce prison overpopulation, making the facilities safer for inmates and employees.
According to Emily Widra, staff member at the Prison Policy Initiative, overpopulation is “correlated with increased violence, lack of adequate health care, limited programming and educational opportunities, and reduced visitation.” During the COVID-19 pandemic, the risks have been even higher as the infection rates were higher in prisons operating at 94% to 102% capacity than in those operating at 84% capacity. [15]

In 2020, nine state prison systems were operating at 100% capacity or above, with Montana at the highest with 121%. Another nine state systems were operating at 90% to 99% capacity or above. The Bureau of Prisons (the US federal system) was operating at 103% capacity. [15]

Austill Stuart, Director of Privatization and Government Reform at the Reason Foundation, explained, “As governments at every level continue to face financial pressures and challenges delivering basic services, contracting provides a tool that enables corrections agencies to better manage costs, while also delivering better outcomes. Performance-based contracts for private prisons, especially contracts tied to reducing recidivism rates, have the possibility of delivering significant improvements that, over the long-term, reduce the overall prison population and help those who are released from jail stay out for good.” [16]

Private prisons can offer overcrowded, underfunded, and overburdened government prisons an alternative by simply removing prisoners from overpopulated state and federal prisons and housing the inmates in a private facility. As prisoner populations lower, so too will the dangers correlated with overcrowding.

Pro 2
Private prisons can transform the broken government-run prison system.
As Adrian Moore, PhD, Vice President of policy at Reason Foundation, explained, “private prisons are a tool, and like all tools, you can use them well or use them poorly.” [17]

Examples of using private prisons well include some private prisons in Australia and New Zealand that have performance-based contracts with the government, The prisons earn “bonuses for doing better than government prisons at cutting recidivism. They get an even bigger bonus if they beat the government at reducing recidivism among their indigenous populations. And prison companies are charged for what the government deems as unacceptable events like riots, escapes and unnatural deaths.” [18]

As the Beeck Center for Social Impact and Innovation at Georgetown University explained, by implementing those sorts of contracts, “the private sector was responsible for designing the solution that would achieve the desired social outcome.” [19]

Oliver Brousse, Chief Executive of the John Laing Investment Group, which built a prison in New Zealand with such a contract, explained, “The prison is designed for rehabilitation. The strength of these public-private partnerships is that they bring the best practices and innovation from all over the world, allowing local authorities to benefit from not only private capital but also from the best people and best practices from other countries.” [18]


Pro 3
Private prisons offer innovative programs to lower the rates of re-imprisonment.
Recidivism is the tendency of those who have committed a criminal act to commit another criminal act, likely landing them back in prison.

GEO Group Inc., an American private prison conglomerate, offers individual treatment plans, drug abuse education and treatment, adult education GED preparation, life skills courses, parenting and family reintegration, anger management, and work readiness vocational skills. The programs are offered as in-custody, residential, and non-residential options, allowing people to access the programs while in prison, out on parole or probation, and while reintegrating into their communities. [20]

Rachael Cole, former Public-Private Partnership Integration director for the New Zealand Department of Corrections, argued, “If we want to establish a prison that focuses on rehabilitation and reintegration, we have to give the private sector the space to innovate. If we don’t give them the opportunity to do things differently, we will just get back what we already have.” [18]

A New Zealand prison operated by Serco, a British company, has men make their own meals, do their own laundry, schedule their own family and medical appointments, and maintain a resume to apply for facility jobs. The prison also responds to the job market: opening cafes to train the men as baristas when coffee shop jobs soared outside prison. Another prison in New Zealand includes a cultural center for Maori inmates, designed to reduce recidivism amongst indigenous populations. [18] [21]

Programs that focus on inmate reentry into society and deal with drug and other abuses can lower recidivism rates, which in turn can lower prison populations and lessen overcrowding and related dangers.